In this video you will learn about linear weighted combinations.
This is a foundational computational operation that underlies basically all of deep learning and lots
of other areas in applied and theoretical mathematics.
In the next video, I will start calling these the dot product and then the video.
Thereafter we will start calling these matrix multiplication.
So lots of fancy terms.
But it's all the same thing which is a linear weighted combination.
Okay, so let's begin.
The idea is that we will conceptualize a an artificial neuron.
So a node in a deep learning network as a weighted combination of its inputs.
So we have several inputs here.
These correspond to numbers depending on the type of neural network you're dealing with and the type
of application you're dealing with.
These might be data values, they might be pixel intensity values and an image.
Of course, in the context of this course, these are going to be numbers that correspond to eventually
that derived from numbers that we get from language from text.
Okay.
So all of these come together, these various numerical inputs come together and then we sum them together.
And that is the output of the neuron.
Some more complexities in here that I will get to later on.
But anyway it's mostly that simple.
Here's an example.
Imagine the numerical values of these inputs are eight and five and minus four.
These are just arbitrary numbers that I came up with.
These would represent the activations of other neurons that are feeding into this neuron.
And what does this neuron do.
Well it just adds up these three inputs and it divides by three.
And why is it dividing by three.
It's to take an average.
And that's basically to normalize the numbers so that when we add more neurons on here, when the network
gets bigger, this output is not arbitrarily getting larger.
Okay.
And so what is the average of these three numbers.
You know the sum of these three numbers divided by three.
Well that happens to also be the number three.
Okay.
Here is another way of conceptualizing that operation.
So we take each of these input activation values and we give them a weight.
That's what this W stands for weight.
So weight of this is one third.
The weight of this is one third.
And the weight of this is one third.
And then we can sum up the activations.
So the numerical values of the activations each scaled by their own weights.
And that's what this is depicting over here.
So eight times one third that is this activation value times this weight value plus five times a third.
That's for this one plus minus four times a third.
And altogether that gives us three.
So when the weights are all equal to each other and those are equal to one divided by n, where n is
the number of inputs, then that's literally just an average.
It's the arithmetic mean.
But we don't have to set the weights to be one third or one divided by n, we can set them to be some
other numbers.
So let's have this be 0.5, this one be 0.3 and this one be 0.2.
Now in this case, the way that I have chosen these numbers, they all sum to one.
So all the weights sum to one.
That can be useful in certain circumstances if you really want to calculate a weighted average.
But it's not strictly necessary.
There's no constraint that these weights need to sum to one.
In fact you will also see that these weights can be negative.
Now why do we get a different number here from the previous slide?
In the previous slide, the answer was three.
And here the answer is 4.7.
So what's happening is that this activation here contributes more.
It's more important than these other two activations.
And it's more important because its weight is higher.
Likewise, you can imagine this weighted sum being a negative number.
If this weight were really large and these two weights were very small.
So the importance of each activation for calculating the weighted linear combination or the weighted
sum is given by the weights.
That's an important concept in deep learning.
Now I'm going to tell you about a special type of input that gets included in neural networks.
And that is called the bias.
So here I have the letter B that stands for bias.
The bias is an additional input that comes into the neuron.
Now mathematically there's nothing really special or unique about this.
The main difference about the bias compared to the other terms is that these all come from data.
So from text that has been converted into numbers.
And the bias does actually doesn't come from the data set.
It doesn't come from the real world.
It's something that is just generated internally and added on to this neurons activation.
And what is the point of this bias?
The purpose of adding a bias is to shift the distributions.
So this allows the neuron to shift this value either to the right or to the left.
So smaller values or larger values.
And that you see here this result was you saw in the previous slide it was 4.7.
And now I've included a bias of minus three.
And that takes the impact of all of this linear weighted combination and shifts it.
In this case it's shifting it to the left by three units.
Okay.
So in Python we are going to explore these concepts.
We will start by calculating a linear weighted combination between activations and weights.
We're going to generate a table that looks like this where yeah we will just build up this linear weighted
combination step by step.
So individual activation by individual weight.
And then that's going to give us a final number which is a linear weighted combination between this
vector of activations and this vector of weights.
Now when you look at these activations you can see that they are not perfectly balanced around zero.
Likewise these weights are not balanced around zero, nor do they sum to one in this case.
Actually, for both of these cases, the average of the activation and the average of the weights is
positive number it's greater than zero.
So we are going to explore whether that introduces any kind of systematic error or bias.
And if it did, then that might need to be something that we would have to consider and specifically
normalize out.
Um, and we are going to do that partly by looking at distributions of linear weighted combinations
using histograms.
So we can see what distribution of lots and lots and lots of linear weighted combinations looks like.
Then I will actually show you how to include a bias term, like what I just showed in the slides a moment
ago.
It turns out that there are correct ways and incorrect ways to include that bias term, and you will
see that that has a real impact on the distribution.
So here you see a distribution.
It's generated by a histogram of lots and lots, I think 10,000 in total linear weighted combinations
of random randomly generated activations and weights.
And then what I tried to do here was include a bias term.
But here the bias term was calculated incorrectly, so it actually did not shift the distribution.
And over here I calculated the bias term correctly.
And now you can see that the distribution is shifted.
So here the bias term was three.
And so the average of this distribution is roughly three plus.
You know a little bit of just random error.
And here I still added a bias term of three.
But I didn't add it correctly.
And so we didn't actually shift the distribution.
Okay.
So now we will switch to Python and explore linear weighted combinations.
So here we are with the code file part nine prereqs Lin weighted combo.
This is always going to be on the top left of the recording.
So you can always check to make sure you are working with the correct code.
Okay.
So let's import some standard libraries that we will need.
Here I'm simulating the activations that are coming in from the previous layer in the network, and
I just came up with some random numbers.
And here we have the weights into the current neuron.
And yeah.
So these would be the weights coming into the neuron.
These are the activations coming into the neuron.
And now we can calculate the linear weighted combination.
This is the computation that the neuron is actually calculating.
And it's there's there's going to be another activation term that we add.
But this is essentially the output that the neuron will pass along to the next layer in the network.
And how do we calculate the linear weighted combination.
Well we initialize it to zero.
And then we have a for loop that goes over all of these activation values and all the weights.
And we simply update the linear combination according to the activation scaled by the weights.
Okay.
And then it turns out that that value is -1.7.
Here I'm making a table so you can see that inside this for loop I'm looping again over all of the activations
and weight values.
And then I'm calculating or displaying the activation times the weight and then their product here.
So that is building up the linear weighted combination piece by piece by element wise multiplication.
And then we sum up all of these values over here.
And that gives us -1.7.
It's also interesting to see that for example this activation is has a value of two.
But it is completely ignored.
It has literally no impact on the downstream neuron because its weight is set to zero.
It is completely ignored.
Likewise, here we have a connection where the weight is actually really strong.
It's, you know, three times stronger than the next strongest weight in this little network.
But the activation happens to be zero.
So again, it doesn't matter how strong the weight is, the activation is zero.
It makes no contribution to the computation that is taking place inside this neuron okay.
So this for loop is I hope that makes it clear what the calculation is.
But it's an awful lot of code and we don't actually need to write a for loop.
We can just implement element wise multiplication and then sum.
This is exactly the calculation of a linear weighted sum.
Okay.
Now I want to discuss whether there is a systematic bias in the results.
Because the weights and the activations vectors are they're not zero, they don't average to zero,
nor do they sum to one.
So to determine whether this is introducing any kind of a bias.
I'm going to run an experiment where I will calculate linear weighted combinations 10,000 times, and
each time randomly generating either new activations while keeping the weights fixed, or generating
random weights while keeping the activations fixed.
So that's what you see here.
I have a for loop over 10,000, and here you see two little snippets of code.
In this first one I am so calculating the linear weighted combination here.
These are the original weights that I defined at the top of the script, but I'm multiplying them by
random activations.
So the activations are randomly, uh, newly generated at each instance in this for loop.
But the weights are always the same.
And here in this piece of code I am basically swapping that.
So the activations are exactly what we defined in the beginning.
And the weights are randomly defined with each iteration.
Okay, so collect all of those into this two dimensional array here.
And then I'm making a histogram.
Now what do we see in this histogram.
First of all this is a distribution of the linear weighted combination values.
So up here with the original data we got a value of -1.7.
So that would be somewhere around here okay.
But then yeah we're repeating this many many times with random numbers.
So that gives us a distribution.
Now what we want to look for here is whether there is a systematic bias introduced in this distribution,
because the weights have a mean offset of what was the mean offset of the weights.
The average of the weights was 0.24 okay.
So the question is do we see this mean offset that's present in the weights reflected in the distribution
of the neurons output activities.
And the answer is a resounding no.
Okay.
Here the average activation was 0.2.
Now, maybe you think that this actually is introducing a systematic bias, but this offset here is
just it's really just random.
If I run this code again now, it gets smaller.
Sometimes we might see a negative number in here.
This is really just zero plus a little bit of you know smudge each time I run this just because we're
generating random numbers here.
Okay.
So the conclusion here is that even if there is a a mean offset in the weights or in the activations,
that does not necessarily introduce any kind of bias in the results.
So what if we actually want to shift this distribution.
Maybe we want all of the neurons in a particular layer to have a positive value, or even just some
of the neurons in a particular layer to be biased towards giving a positive value or a negative value,
or anything other than zero.
That can be accomplished using the the bias term or yeah, you can also call it an offset.
So here I set the bias term to be equal to three.
And now in this term I am repeating a very similar experiment to what we were just discussing.
But here.
So here I'm generating random activations.
We're going to keep the weights fixed.
And now the main point here is to add the bias term.
Okay.
So how do we include this bias term.
What I do in this calculation over here is multiply the activations by the weights.
So linear weighted sum.
But before calculating the weighted sum I'm adding the bias term to the weights.
So you can see it is the weights plus the bias.
And then the So I'm shifting all the weights and then I'm multiplying by the activations, and then
I'm summing all of those to give me a linear weighted combination.
So that's option one.
Turns out that this is not going to work.
And then well it will work in the sense that it doesn't crash, but it doesn't actually shift the distribution
the way we want it to.
And then here what I'm doing is first calculating the linear weighted combination of all the activations
and all the weights without any bias.
And then after that calculation is complete, then I am adding the bias or the offset term.
Okay.
So let's see what we get over here.
Well you already saw this image in the slides.
So you already have an idea.
So this bias term was incorrectly calculated.
It did not shift the distribution.
Again even if you think this is shifting the distribution a little bit.
First of all this is two orders of magnitude smaller than the bias term itself.
And also this is non-systematic.
Here we get, if anything, a tiny negative shift.
But here the entire distribution was shifted by approximately three.
Again, it's not exact just because we are generating random numbers.
So in this video you learned about linear weighted combinations.
It's a super duper simple mathematical computation, but it is really foundational.
It's ubiquitous certainly in deep learning and in lots of areas of applied mathematics.
We discussed biasing the results either by shifting the distribution of the weights or of the activations,
which doesn't actually really impose a bias.
But we can introduce a bias by adding a specific term that gets summed onto the result after the linear
weighted combination is calculated.